We've read the Iliad and the Odyssey.
So, Homer
becomes the basis
for Greek civilization. Meaning that all
educated Greeks,
they memorize the Iliad in Odyssey.
People don't people don't read read them
right now at at this point. They speak
and they listen in front of um an
audience.
And so Homer
becomes basically the infrastructure of
their mental worldview
and um this leads to the greatest
civilization in human history.
But eventually the Romans will conquer
the Greeks. The Romans will conquer the
entire Mediterranean and they will uh
create the Roman Empire.
The Romans are nothing like the Greeks.
The Greeks are very open uh very
curious. They believe in the idea of
sorry um
and udeimmonia.
Erite means excellence to
be the best at what you can. Udimmonia
means flourishing. You can only achieve
human happiness if you achieve your
erete. Okay? If you become your erete.
So think of Odysius who was great
speaker. That is his
um and he uses his speech in order to
fulfill his destiny and to save his
family. Okay? And that achieves
udeimmonia. The Romans are very
different. The Romans believed in the
idea of piety.
Okay? And piety just means obedience to
your fathers,
to history, and to tradition. And so the
Romans are an extremely conservative
people, but they're very good at
fighting wars, and that's why they
become the empire. Um but after the
empire is established, what the Romans
recognize is that Greek culture is
vastly superior and many well educated
Romans begin to drift towards Greek
culture which in the Roman perspective
leads to the corruption of the Roman
soul. And so Augustus Caesar
who is really considered the first
emperor of Rome he recognizes that in
the long term even though the Romans
have conquered the Greeks
physically
spiritually the Greeks will conquer the
the Romans and the main issue is Homer.
So his solution is to destroy Homer. You
can't burn books because uh there there
aren't that many books and also people
have memorized Homer. So you need to
corrupt Homer. And the solution that he
devises is called the Iniad.
And we can consider the iniad as the
antihomer. Okay? Or the inversion of
Homer. taking the ideas of Homer and
inverting them.
Okay. So, um this becomes the Bible
of Roman Empire, meaning that if you're
a school boy, you have to memorize the
Iniad. And this is the main way that you
learn Latin, the official language of
the um Roman Empire. And so whereas
Homer will give us Greek civilization
and the birth of Western civilization,
the Iniad will create the dark ages a
thou about a thousand years when Western
creativity um ends
and
then someone will emerge who will
recognize the evil that is the Iniad and
he will create a antidote to the poison
that is the Iniad. And this person of
course is called Dante. Okay.
And so what we'll do is we will read the
iniad for the next two weeks and
understand how it poisons and corrupts
Homer and then this will lead us to the
divine comedy which is really the
liberation of the human soul from the
poison that is the iniad. Okay. All
right. So um some basic background about
the iniad. So the Iniad what it does is
it replicates both the Odyssey and the
Iliad. Uh the Iniad is 12 it's 24 books.
The first 12 books models off the
Odyssey. The last 12 books models off
the Iliad. So uh the story begins when
Inas
he um is one of the survivors
of the fall of Troy. Okay. And so he
takes his father and his child to go off
to the Italian peninsula because the
gods have told him that he he has fated
he is destined to found the Roman
Empire. And that's why the gods had to
destroy Troy in order to create the
Roman Empire. But as he um sails to
Italian Peninsula, uh there's a
shipwreck and he lands in Carthage.
Okay, Carthage.
And there he meets the queen Ditto.
And the Carthaginians and Ditto are
extremely hospitable to Inas.
And so they have this huge banquet. And
Inias is telling her about the story of
the fall of Troy. How Troy fell.
Remember remember that Homer doesn't
actually discuss the fall of Troy, but
Inias will discuss the fall of Troy. And
by discussing the four of his main
purpose is to show how duplicitous,
manipulative, deceptive the Greeks are.
Okay. He's he's also going to tell us um
um
why the values of Homer are evil, why
love is evil, why love will lead you
into tragedy. And then by telling the
story, what will happen is that uh Inas
will seduce Ditto. Ditto will fall in
love with him. Not because not only is
he brave and handsome, but he's also a
great poet. He's able to tell the story
in a beautiful manner. And so they fall
in love. Okay. All right. So this is the
beginning of the in in uh uh uh Iniad.
And so what what what we're going to
read first is it is a story of the fall
of Troy. It begins when the Greeks
pretend to leave the beaches of Troy
and they leave behind a wooden horse.
Okay? And there's a huge debate among
the Trojans as to what to do with this
horse and they decide basically, you
know, we can't take a risk. Let's just
destroy the this horse, throw throw it
uh into the sea. And then what happens
is that a Greek soldier emerges and he's
a prisoner. He's he was caught by some
shepherds and he tells the story of the
Trojan horse and why it's really not a
threat to the Trojans. In fact, it's a
gift from the Greeks to the gods. So,
because it's a gift to the gods, you
cannot destroy it because then you piss
off the gods. Okay? And what this is
going to show us is that the Greek
culture, philosophy, theater, rhetoric,
it's all one of deception. The real
chosen horse is Greek culture. You
cannot let Greek culture into Rome
because then it will corrupt and poison
the empire from within. Okay? So that
that so again this is propaganda. So
it's very blatant what they're doing.
Okay? It's very blatant what Virgil um
is doing and okay something I I need to
explain is like Virgil is considered the
poet who composed
this uh iniad but it was actually
Augustus Caesar who wrote this.
Basically, Augustus Caesar was one who
provided Virgil with a framework and
then Virgil um uh composed it into Latin
poetry.
And actually at the end of his life,
Virgil actually want to burn this down,
burn this. And the reason why is if
you're a poet, what you believe is that
your gift comes from the gods. And so
you represent the gods. But if you
actually work for the empire, if you
actually use your gift for the emperor,
then maybe the gods will punish you.
Right? So Virgil, Virgil was very much
afraid and wanted to like burn the uh
Iniad. Um but August Caesar would not
let him. And so this became the Bible of
the Roman Empire. It is a evil evil
piece of work. Okay? And it is the
antihomer. So, we're going to study it
um because it's going to shape Western
civilization throughout the Middle Ages
until the coming of Dante. Okay. So, all
right. So, Ivory, can you read, please?
>> Yeah. Suddenly, in the thick of it all,
a young soldier, hands shackled behind
his back with much shouting, Trojan
shepherds were hauling him toward the
king. He'd come on the man by chance, a
total stranger. He'd given himself up
with one goal in mind, to open Troy to
the Greeks and lay her waste. He trusted
to courage, nerved for either end, to
weave his lies or face a certain death.
Young Trojan recruits, keen to have a
look, came scurrying up from all sides,
crowding round, outdoing each other to
make a mockery of the captive. Now hear
the treachery of the Greeks, and learn
from a single crime the nature of the
beast. haggarded, helpless, there in our
midst he stood, all eyes revant on him
now, and turning a weary glance at the
lines of the of Trojan troops, he
groaned and spoke. Where can I find some
refuge? Where on land, on sea? What's
left for me now? A man of so much
misery. Nothing among the Greeks, no
place at all. And worse, I see my Trojan
enemies crying for my blood. His groans
convince us, cutting all our show of
violence short. Okay. So at this time in
history and this this is about um about
30 BCE
um Greek theater is very very popular.
The Romans love Greek theater and Greek
theater is really um the very paragon of
Greek civilization. And what this is
telling us is that no Greek theater is
evil. It's meant to deceive us. Okay. So
this soldier, this Greek soldier, he is
trained in theater. He's trained in
philosophy. He's trained in rhetoric.
And he's using all his craft, all his
skills in order to ultimately deceive
the good but but naive Trojans. Okay.
All right. So he tells the story
of how he came to be left behind uh in
Troy. And the story is that he pissed
off Odysius. Odysius plotted against
him. So, so when it came time for the
Greeks to leave Troy and sell home, they
need they needed to sacrifice a person
and that person was this guy. But
somehow this guy ran off. Okay. Okay.
Can you read Ivory?
>> The day of infamy soon came. The sacred
rights were all performed for the
victim. The salted meals strewn, the
bands tied around my head. But I broke
free of death, I tell you. Burst my
shackles. Yes. And hid all night in the
reeds of a marshy lake, waiting for them
to sail. If only they would sail. Well,
no hope now of seeing the land where I
was born. Or my sweet children, the
father I longed for all these years.
Maybe they'll ring from them the price
of for my escape. Avenge my guilt with
my loved ones blood. Poor things. I beg.
I beg you, king. By the powers who know
the truth, by any trust still uncorrupt
in the world of men, pity a man whose
torment knows no bounds. Pity me in my
pain. I know in my soul I don't deserve
to suffer. He wept and won his life. Our
pity too. Pam takes command. Has him
freed from the ropes and chains that
bind him fast and hails him warmly.
Whoever you are from now on you've lost
the Greeks. Put them out of your mind
and you'll be one of us. But answer my
questions. Tell me the whole truth. Why
did they raise up this giant monstrous
horse? Who conceived it? What's it for?
Its purpose, a gift to the gods, a great
engine of battle.
>> Okay, so again, this reminds us of the
Iliad where Pry, the king of the
Trojans, is known for being a very
generous,
magnolent, uh, sorry, um, benevolent
um, open person. But this will lead to
the doom of Troy. So remember in the
Iliad it is because of prime's
generosity his ability to forgive Il uh
Achilles that leads to the great
friendship between Pry and Achilles.
Okay. And again Virgil is trying to
reverse this and he's trying to show us
that no you think that generosity will
lead to goodness. No, generosity will
lead to evil. You see how prime is too
trusting, too generous. And so he
believes this Greek uh soldier and then
he will allow the Trojans to bring the
horse into
Troy and at night the the Greek soldiers
will escape from the horse, open the
gates of Troy and now the Greeks are
rushing in to kill everyone. Okay. And
Inas
hears this um slaughter and he tries to
save as many people as he can. And his
first thought is, "Where is my king? How
do I save my king?" Okay. So, as the
Greeks are ravaging the city, killing as
many people as they can, Inas is rushing
to save his king, Priam. All right. All
right. So, can you read uh Ivory?
>> Perhaps you wonder how Pam met his end.
When he saw his city stormed and seized,
his gates wrenched apart, the enemy
camped in his palace deaths. The the old
man dawned his armor long unused. He
clamps it around his shoulders, shaking
with age, and all for nothing, straps
his useless sword to his hip, then makes
for the thick of battle, out to meet his
death. At the heart of the house, an
ample altar stood naked under disguise.
An ancient laurel bending over the
shrine, embracing our household gods
within its shade. Here flocking the
altar, Hakuba and her daughter is
huddled, blown headlong down like doves
by a black storm, clutching all for
nothing the figures of their gods.
Seeing Pam decked in the arms he'd worn
as a young man. Are you insane? He c she
cries. Poor husband. What impels you to
strap that sword on now? Where are you
rushing? Too late for such defense, such
help. Not even to my for my own not even
my own Hector if he came to the rescue.
Now come to me Pam. This altar will
shield us all or else you'll die with
us. With those wars drawing him towards
her there she made a place for the old
man beside the holy shrine.
>> Okay let's continue.
>> Suddenly look a son of Pum Pol just just
escaped from slaughter at Pyrus's hands.
>> Okay, so Pyrus is a son of Achilles.
Okay, so this is a rewriting of the
ending of the Iliad where
Pry and Achilles have this great
emotional battle where they forgive each
other and uh Prime's love for Hector and
Achilles love for his father unifies
their soul. Okay, this is going to be a
rewriting of that battle. So Achilles is
dead and now his son is seeking to kill
Pryam. Keep on going.
>> Comes racing through spears, through
enemy fighters, fleeing down the long
arcades and deserted hallways. Badly
wounded, Pyrus hot on his heels, a
weapon poised for the kill, about to
seize him, about to run him through and
pressing home as polities reaches his
parents and collapses, vomiting out his
lifeblood before their eyes at that.
Okay, so again this is a rewriting of
the Iliad where now Polites becomes
Hector, right? Because remember
um Achilles kills Hector
at the gates of Troy and Prime Heguba
are on the walls watching this and then
Achilles commits um a war crime by
basically tying Hector to his chariot
and then um um dragging Hector all
around the wall the walls of tour. Okay,
so this is a re reimagining of that
scene. Okay, keep keep on going.
>> At that PM trapped in the grip grip of
death, not holding back, not checking
his words, his rage. You, he cries, you
and your vicious crimes. If any power on
Hile recoils at such an outrage, let the
gods repay you for all your reckless
work. Grant you the thanks, the rich
reward you, the the rich reward you've
earned. You've made me see my son's
death with my own eyes. Defiled the
father's sight with a son's lifeblood.
You say you're Achilles, the son. You
lie. Achilles never treated his enemy
preempo. No, he honored a supply right.
He blessed to betray my my trust. He
restored my hectar's bloodless corpse
for for burial. Sent me safely home to
the land I rule.
>> Okay. So again he is reminding us of the
ending of the Iliad where in this great
war peace and love come to universe when
Achilles and Pry um are able to become
friends. Okay.
And he's saying
your father you've you've destroyed the
legacy of your father. You've destroyed
the friendship between us. Okay. All
right, keep on reading.
>> With that and with all his might, the
old man flings a spear, but too impotent
now to pierce, it merely grazes Pyrus's
brazen shield that blocks his way and
clings there, dangling limb from the
boss, all for nothing. Pyrus shouts
back, "Well then, down you go, a
messenger to my father, Pelus's son.
Tell him about my vicious work. How
neoblimus
degrades his father. Neilmus is actually
another name for pyrus. Okay, it's the
same person. Keep on going.
>> Degraes his father's name. Don't you
forget now. Die. That said, he drags the
old man straight to the altar, quaking,
slithering on through slicks of his
son's blood and twisting preemps his
hair in his left hand, his right hand
sweeping forth his sword, a flash of
steel. He buries his hill deep in the
king's flank. Such was the fate of P of
Pum, his death, his law on earth. With
Troy blazing before his eyes, her
ramparts down, the monarch who once had
ruled in all his glory, the many lands
of Asia, Asia's many tribes, a powerful
trunk is lying on the shore, the head
wrenched from the shoulders, a corpse
without a name.
>> Okay, so
there's a difference between the Greeks
and the Romans. Okay, the Greeks are
very cultured people. They enjoy going
to the theater and watching a tragedy
and crying together to rejuvenate their
sense of humanity. Okay, that was a
Greek culture. The the Romans go to the
coliseum and watch gladiator fights.
Okay, they like blood. They like
violence. And so the Iniad is an
extremely violent
uh poetry. In fact, you can say it's
almost pornographic in the violence that
it depicts. All right? And the Romans
just love this because they are a
bloodthirsty people. All right?
All right. So, Prime is dead and with
its death, what it is doing is negating
the
um moral lesson of the iliac to forgive
one's enemy. Okay. Okay. So, the Romans
read this and they remember reading the
saying, "Oh my god, I was wrong to think
that Prime was heroic in forgiving
Achilles." What I should be really
thinking is what a foolish old man who
deserves to die for thinking that his
enemy should be forgiven that for
thinking that his enemy has a good soul
in him. Okay, so again, this is negating
the Iliad. is actually poisoning and
corrupting the Iliad. All right. So, um,
now Inas is talking about his reaction
watching
his king die. Okay. Uh, keep on reading,
Ivory.
>> Then for the first time, the full horror
came home at came home to me at last. I
froze. The thought of my own dear father
filled filled my mind when I saw the old
king gasping out his life with that raw
raw wound. Both men were the same age.
And the thought of my cruisa alone,
abandoned, our house plundered, our
little Elas's fate. I look back, what
forces still stood by me? None. Totally
spent in war. They'd all deserted down
from the roofs. They flung themselves to
earth or hold their broken bodies in the
flames. So at just that moment, I was
the one man left. And then I saw her
clinging to Vestus' threshold, hiding in
silence, tucked away. Helen of Argos.
Glare of the fires lit my view as I
looked down, scanning the city left and
right. And there she was, terrified of
the Trojans's hate. Now Troy was
overpowered, terrified of the Greeks'
revenge, her deserted husband's rage.
That universal fury, a curse to Troy and
her native land. And here she lurked,
skullking, a thing of of loathing,
cowering at the altar. Helen out it
flared the fire inside my soul, my rage
ablaze to avenge our f our fallen
country. Pay Helen back crime for crime.
Okay. So,
Inas is watching his entire civilization
being destroyed and he knows that his
family will be destroyed as well. And he
is taken a back. He's sort of like
paralyzed by his anger and his hatred
and his fear. And then he sees Helen and
he's like, "This is her fault." Okay,
this is why we are we are destroying a
civilization because of this
Okay, and so this is telling us what
this the lesson from this is that love
is a source of evil in the world.
Okay, love is a source of evil in this
world.
Remember the odyssey. What is the what
is the um main lesson of the Odyssey?
Love is the redemptive force of the
world. Right? If you are shattered as a
person, it is love that will lead you
home and heal you as a person. And what
the Iniad is saying said is that love is
what destroys civilization. Love is what
corrupts you. Love is what leads you to
hell. Okay. All right. So he wants to
kill Helen as revenge for destruction of
Troy. But then what happens is that
Inis's mother Venus. Okay. So Venus is
his mother
steps in, appears before him and says,
"No, you can't do this. You have to go
home and save your wife and your child."
Okay. So Inas goes home and what he does
is he save he takes his family and takes
them to the ship to escape Troy.
But as they are running through the um
um streets of Troy,
uh what Inis does is he puts his father
on his back. Okay. And he holds his son,
his young son, uh Ilas and the and
Cissa, the wife has to follow them.
Okay. Okay. So that that's a Roman
priority. Okay. The most important
person in the family is the patriarch,
the father. Then is the son who inherits
and the wife is just someone who
follows. Okay. But her job is to serve
rather than being equal in the
relationship. And this again is very
different from the Odyssey where in many
ways Penelope and AudiS are equal to
each other. Okay. All right. So what
happens is that Inas gets to the ship
and he and he puts his father and his
son on the ship ready to escape, but he
recognizes at the at the very last
minute his wife is missing. So he goes
back and tries to save
his wife, but his wife is dead. And why
is she dead? Because she killed herself.
Why did she kill herself? She killed
herself because it is her duty not to
burden her husband. because her husband
is destined for great things. He's
destined to found an empire. So, he must
marry into a new lineage, a new royal
family. And therefore, she has to kill
herself to free him. But not only that,
but if she were to become a slave to the
Greeks, it would cause him embarrassment
for the rest of his life. Right? Okay.
So, um that is the Roman perception of a
wely duty. Okay? If you're not useful to
your husband, just kill yourself.
Okay. Uh c can you read?
>> Creusa. Nothing. No reply. And again,
Cusa.
But then as I madly rushed from house to
house, no one in sight. Abruptly, right
before my eyes, I saw her stricken
ghost. My own cruises shade. But larger
than life, the life I known so well. I
froze. My hackles bristled. voice choked
in my throat and my wife spoke out to
ease me of my anguish. My dear husband,
why so eager to give yourselves s to
such mad flights of grief? Is not
without the will of the gods these
things have come to pass? But the gods
forbid you to take Cusa with you, bound
from Troy together. The king of Lio
Olympus won't allow it. A long exile is
your fate. The vast plains of the sea
are yours to plow when you reach
Hisperian land where Lydian tber flows
with a smooth march through rich and
lomy fields, a land of hearty people.
There great joy and the kingdom are
yours to claim and the queen to make
your wife. Dispel your tears for Carusa
whom you loved. I will never behold the
high and mighty pride of their palaces,
the Mermadons, the Delopians, or go as a
slave to to some Greek matron. No, not
I, daughter of Dardanus, that I am the
wife of Venus's son. The great mother of
God detains me on these shores. And now,
farewell. Hold dear the son we share. We
love together.
>> Again, this is very different from the
Odyssey where the Odyssey is really
about a journey of two people, Penelopey
and Odysius, to find each other again
because love is the greatest force in
the universe. Okay. Love is what compels
the two to reunite and to find each
other amidst all the chaos um
surrounding them.
In the INIAD the idea is that love is
hell. So what is heaven? Okay, if love
is hell what is heaven?
Heaven is piety.
Piety just means obedience to the
prophecy of the gods. Right. It is the
will of the gods that Troy be destroyed
so that Rome can be created. It is a pro
it is the prophecy of the gods that Inas
will be the one to lead the Trojans to
found this Rome. And therefore what is
good what is divine is obedience to this
prophecy. Okay. So uh a long exile is
your fate.
All right. The king of mal lofty Olympus
won't allow Zeus okay or Jupiter demands
this of us. If Zup if Jupiter demands us
to sacrifice ourselves then we must do
so. Okay. And so this reverses
the odyssey
right where the gods will it
Penelopey and Odysius reunite.
But here um the gods will that and
separate.
All right. Okay. So um from our eyes
this doesn't sound
that influential but the reality is
remember this becomes the basis of Roman
civilization.
All right. And what is civilization? But
a set of values, a set of ideas that
guide you in your life. Okay? And what
this is doing is inverting Homer,
poisoning, and corrupting Homer. All
right. Okay. Any questions, guys?
Okay. So, we'll we'll continue this next
week. Okay.